---
layout: post
title:  "Release"
date:   2021-01-01
comments: true
author: Will Usher
category: practice
tags: repeatability reusability reconstructability auditability
---

When continually working on the development of software, data, a computer model or methodology,
you need a way to identify the specific instance used to produce a research output.
This aids **reproducibility** by creating a provenance trail
from the research output to the exact sources that contribute to that output.

"Releasing" or "creating a release" is a practice that stems from the software development cycle
and is facilitated by use of version control.
However, you do not have to use version control to apply the principles to your own work.

In the following sections, we explain how you can use the practice of creating a release
to meet the requirements of **reproducible research**.

## Existing standards

In software development, a common standard is to use [semantic versioning][3],
where three numbers are separated by full-stops,
and the numbers are incremented after major, minor and "patch" changes respectively.
The advantage of using semantic versioning is that it becomes very easy to reference a specific version (e.g. v1.2.1) and determine that another version is newer (v1.2.2 and v1.10.3 are newer than v1.2.1), and to what extent the versions differ (v1.0 to v2.0 will include major "breaking" changes).

## Releasing software, an advanced example

The Python package [smif][4] uses the following procedure for handling new releases [edited for clarity]. The source code is held under version control using Git and published on Github.

|Release step| Notes|
|-|-|
| create a release branch | by creating a branch to track a release, the release can be prepared independently of the main codebase |
| update CHANGELOG file with notes on features and fixes since last release. | The changelog contains a summary of all the changes made since the previous release |
| update AUTHORS file | A list of all the contributors to the software |
| create and push an annotated tag | A "tag" uniquely identifies the version of the code which forms the release. Semantic versioning is used. |
| open a pull request | The pull request offers an opportunity to review and field comments from contributors. It also triggers automated tests, and if these pass, automated deployment of the release to the package index |
| wait (~15 minutes) for tests to pass | The tests affirm code quality and that the release will be ready for production (i.e. it will work) |
| check that deploy stage ran as expected, new version available on https://pypi.org/project/smif/#history | The released software is available for installation on the Python Packaging Index |
| create a GitHub release for the tag | A Github release triggers the release to be archived on Zenodo |

See the complete notes in the [smif documentation](https://smif.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developers.html#releases).

## Releasing data

It is possible to apply semantic versioning to data (for example CSV files), but the rules are hard to generalize outside of their specific contexts.

## Releasing other material

There are many examples of version control, tags and releases applied to structured documents, such as data standards [42] to better clarify to process and enable distributed collaboration.

## Further Reading and Next Steps



---

This material is derived from the [CCG review of good enough practices][1] which is released under a [CC-BY 4.0 license][2].

[1]: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5911546 "Usher, William, Beltramo, Agnese, Gardumi, Francesco, Martin, Viktoria, & Petrarulo, Luca. (2022). CCG Platform - Body of Knowledge: Review of Good Practice (1.3). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5911546"

[2]: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode

[3]: https://semver.org/ "Semantic Versioning 2.0.0"

[4]: https://doi.org/10.5334/jors.265 "Will Usher and Tom Russell. (2019) A Software Framework for the Integration of Infrastructure Simulation Models. Journal of Open Research Software, 7: 16 DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/jors.265"